---
layout: post
title:  "How to implement a tool"
date:   2019-11-25 22:11:38 +0100
categories: misc
author: Lukas
---

The interactive manipulator (imp) in Horizon EDA is the editor for anything 
that exists in 2D space, to be more precise:
 
 - Symbols
 - Schematics
 - Padstacks
 - Packages
 - Boards

The user interaction mostly revolves around tools that allow the user 
to do one particular action such as moving or deleting objects or a 
global operation not specific to an object such as modifying the 
board's stackup.

For the purpose of this post, we'll implement a tool that changes on 
edge of a polygon to an arc.

# Add the tool to the action catalog

First of all, we'll have to add our new tool to the `ToolID` enum in 
[tool_id.hpp](https://github.com/horizon-eda/horizon/blob/master/src/core/tool_id.hpp#L7)
:
```diff {% raw %}
enum class ToolID {
     ...
     POLYGON_TO_LINE_LOOP,
+    POLYGON_EDGE_TO_ARC
 };{% endraw %}
```

With that in place, we can add it to the action catalog to give it a 
human-readable name. 

```diff {% raw %}
const std::map<std::pair<ActionID, ToolID>, ActionCatalogItem> action_catalog =
 {
         ...
         {{ActionID::TOOL, ToolID::POLYGON_TO_LINE_LOOP},
          {"Polygon to line loop", ActionGroup::GRAPHICS, ActionCatalogItem::AVAILABLE_EVERYWHERE,
           ActionCatalogItem::FLAGS_DEFAULT}},
+
+        {{ActionID::TOOL, ToolID::POLYGON_EDGE_TO_ARC},
+         {"Polygon edge to arc", ActionGroup::GRAPHICS, ActionCatalogItem::AVAILABLE_EVERYWHERE,
+          ActionCatalogItem::FLAGS_DEFAULT}},
 }; {% endraw %}
```

`ActionGroup::GRAPHICS` will make our new tool show up in the graphics 
group in the spacebar menu and the the key sequences preferences. 
`ActionCatalogItem::AVAILABLE_EVERYWHERE` specifies that the tool is 
valid for all editor types (symbols, etc., see above). The key 
sequences preferences editor also uses this to allow for key bindings 
specific to an editor type. The flags declared by 
`ActionCatalogItem::FLAGS_DEFAULT` could be used to hide 
the tool from various places such as the context menu or the key sequences 
preferences, but aren't needed in our case.

We'll also have to add our new tool to the tool LUT so there's a 
machine-readable name for our tool:

```diff {% raw %}
const LutEnumStr<ToolID> tool_lut = {
         ...
         TOOL_LUT_ITEM(POLYGON_TO_LINE_LOOP),
+        TOOL_LUT_ITEM(POLYGON_EDGE_TO_ARC),
 };{% endraw %}
```


# Implement the tool

Now that we've told the imp about our tool, we can go about actually 
implementing it, starting with the header in 
`core/tool_polygon_edge_to_arc.hpp`:

```c++
#pragma once
#include "core.hpp"

namespace horizon {

class ToolPolygonEdgeToArc : public ToolBase {
public:
    ToolPolygonEdgeToArc(Core *c, ToolID tid);
    ToolResponse begin(const ToolArgs &args) override;
    ToolResponse update(const ToolArgs &args) override;
    bool can_begin() override;
    bool is_specific() override
    {
        return true;
    }

private:
    std::pair<class Polygon *, size_t> get_polygon_edge();
    Polygon *poly = nullptr;
    size_t vertex_index = 0;
    Polygon::Vertex *vertex = nullptr;
};
} // namespace horizon
```

Tools have to inherit from `ToolBase` to be a tool in the first place. 
Some tools share code by inheriting from helper classes such as 
`ToolHelperMove`.

# Make the tool creatable

To map our tool's class `ToolPolygonEdgeToArc` to its ID 
`POLYGON_EDGE_TO_ARC`, we'll add this to the `Core::create_tool` 
method:

```diff {% raw %}
 ...
 #include "tool_polygon_to_line_loop.hpp"
+#include "tool_polygon_edge_to_arc.hpp"
 ...
 std::unique_ptr<ToolBase> Core::create_tool(ToolID tool_id)
 {
     ...
     case ToolID::POLYGON_TO_LINE_LOOP:
         return std::make_unique<ToolPolygonToLineLoop>(this, tool_id);
 
+    case ToolID::POLYGON_EDGE_TO_ARC:
+        return std::make_unique<ToolPolygonEdgeToArc>(this, tool_id);
+ {% endraw %}
```

## Lifecycle

Before diving into the actual implementation, we'll need to understand 
the lifecycle of a tool.

### Testing if a tool is valid

Before the user invokes a tool, various parts of the imp such as the 
context menu or the spacebar menu need figure out if our tool makes 
sense to be invoked in the current situation or not. To do so, each 
tool that's available for the editor type is constructed and 
its `can_begin` method is called. If it returns `true`, the tool shows 
up in the context or spacebar menu. There's also the `is_specific` 
method that tells if a tool is specific to the current selection (e.g. 
delete) or  operates independently (e.g. edit stackup). Only specific 
tools show up in the context menu to reduce clutter.

### Invoking a tool

Once the users has invoked a tool, the imp tells the core to construct 
it and calls the tool's `begin` method. The `begin` method is the place 
to do things that need to be done once during the tool's lifecycle. For 
some tools that don't require interaction, the tool's lifecyle ends in 
`begin` by returning `ToolResponse::end()`.

While the tool is active, it receives all user input, i.e. key presses, 
mouse movement and clicks in it's `update` method. Once the tool 
determines the user is done editing, it returns `ToolResponse::end()` 
and the imp and core destroy the tool and do the necessary cleanup.

## Actually implement the tool

With all of the boilerplate in place we can finally start writing code 
that does something! The source code for our tool goes in
`core/tool_polygon_edge_to_arc.cpp` and we need to add it to the 
`SRC_IMP` variable in the `Makefile`.

```c++
ToolPolygonEdgeToArc::ToolPolygonEdgeToArc(Core *c, ToolID tid) : ToolBase(c, tid)
{
}
```

The constructor can usually be left empty, any initialisation has to 
take in place since the constructor will also be called when just 
checking if the tool can do something useful.

### can_begin

```c++
bool ToolPolygonEdgeToArc::can_begin()
{
    if (!core.r->has_object_type(ObjectType::POLYGON))
        return false;
    return get_polygon_edge().first;
}

std::pair<Polygon *, size_t> ToolPolygonEdgeToArc::get_polygon_edge()
{
    for (const auto &it : core.r->selection) {
        if (it.type == ObjectType::POLYGON_EDGE) {
            return {core.r->get_polygon(it.uuid), it.vertex};
        }
    }
    return {nullptr, 0};
} 
```

The `Core` is the part of the interactive manipulator that holds the 
document (symbol, schematic, board, etc.) and provides a unified 
interface to object types common to more than one document type such 
as polygons or lines. For each document type, there's a  
subclass of the `Core`. A tool gets access to the `Core` by means of 
the `Cores` convince class that holds pointers to every possible 
subclass with only the generic one `r` and the pointer for the current 
document type being non-null. This way we can write `core.c` instead of 
the more lengthy `dynamic_cast<CoreSchematic*>(core)`. As our tool is 
intended to be used on every document type that supports polygons, we 
only need to consider `core.r`.

The first thing `can_begin` needs to check, is if the current document type 
supports polygons. If the tool would only make sense for boards, we'd 
first check if `core.b` is not null to ensure the document is a board 
and not something else.

The next thing to check is if the user had 
selected a polygon edge by looking for a `SelectableRef` with `type == 
ObjectType::POLYGON_EDGE` in the  core's selection. The core receives 
the selection from the canvas the moment a tool is invoked by the user. 
As we'll need to find the polygon edge from the selection as well when actually 
using the tool, this code is factored out into the `get_polygon_edge` 
method. After having found a polygon edge, we get the corresponding 
`Polygon` from the core by the `uuid` from the `SelectableRef`.


### begin

```c++
ToolResponse ToolPolygonEdgeToArc::begin(const ToolArgs &args)
{
    std::tie(poly, vertex_index) = get_polygon_edge();
    vertex = &poly->vertices.at(vertex_index);
    vertex->type = Polygon::Vertex::Type::ARC;
    vertex->arc_center = args.coords;
    imp->tool_bar_set_tip("<b>LMB:</b>place arc center <b>RMB:</b>cancel <b>e:</b>flip arc");
    return ToolResponse();
}
```

Since we now have the `Polygon` and the vertex we want to work with, we 
can start modifying it. The first thing to do is to set the type of the 
selected vertex to be an arc and set the arc's center to the current 
cursor position. It's important to do this in `begin` as if we'd only 
do it in `update`, the user would see an unexpected jump when first 
moving the mouse after activating the tool. The `begin` method also is 
the right place to set the tool bar tip visible at the bottom of the 
canvas to tell the user about ways of interacting with the tool.

### update

```c++
ToolResponse ToolPolygonEdgeToArc::update(const ToolArgs &args)
{
    if (args.type == ToolEventType::MOVE) {
        vertex->arc_center = args.coords;
    }
    else if (args.type == ToolEventType::KEY) {
        if (args.key == GDK_KEY_e) {
            vertex->arc_reverse = !vertex->arc_reverse;
        }
    }
    else if (args.type == ToolEventType::CLICK) {
        if (args.button == 1) {
            core.r->commit();
            return ToolResponse::end();
        }
        else if (args.button == 3) {
            core.r->revert();
            return ToolResponse::end();
        }
    }
    return ToolResponse();
}
```

The `update` method is where real action happens: Every time the user 
does something, this method gets called and has to update the document 
accordingly. The imp will take care of updating the canvas so that the 
user can see what they're doing.

For mouse move events (`ToolEventType::MOVE`) we just set the arc's 
center position to the cursor position. If we were to spend more time 
on this, we'd set it along the perpendicular bisector of the original 
edge so that the start and end radii are the same.

Since arcs can go either clockwise or counterclockwise from start to 
end, we use the `e` key to allow the user to flip the arc's direction. 
For simplicity, the `key` member of `ToolArgs` uses the key symbols 
defined by the Gdk header `gdkkeysyms.h`.

For our tool, we use mouse click events to either commit or revert the 
user's modifications to the document. The `button` member of `ToolArgs`
uses the same semantics as Gdk with 1 being the left and 3 being the 
right mouse button. It's important to either call `Core::commit()` or 
`Core::revert()` before ending the tool by returning `ToolResponse::end()`
for the undo/redo history to work as intended.

# Closing words

The tool implemented in this post is a rather simple one, but should 
help to explain the concepts used in more complex tools. Happy coding!
