---
layout: post
title:  "Progress Report April 2020"
date:   2020-04-28 19:30:00 +0100
categories: progress
author: Lukas
---

This progress report is published a bit earlier than usual to coincide
with the release of version 1.1.0.

## Python module enhancements

The python module has seen quite a lot of development this month in
order to make it possible to do export tasks in continuous integration
environments and other scripts.

### STEP export

Adding STEP export to the python module was pretty straightforward as
the STEP exporter itself doesn't have any dependencies inside
of Horizon EDA. However this means that the python module now has a
hard dependency on opencascade.

### DRC

Implementing running checks from the python module was a bit more involved though as
it required two changes to be made beforehand:

First of all, we
need to be able to return the check results. The easiest way of
accomplishing this is serializing the results as JSON as there's already
code to create a python `dict` from a C++ `json` object.

Second, we need to provide something that implements `IDocument` as
it's required by the check cache. Up until this point the only
implementation of `IDocument` was to be found in the `Core` class,
that's unsuitable for inclusion in the python module as it has indirect
UI dependencies. To make it easier to write other classes that
implement this interface, common parts were factored out from
`Core` and `CoreBoard` to `Document` and `DocumentBoard`.
All of this was enabled by the introduction of
the `IDocument` interface a few months earlier.

With this in place, the only left things left to do were to make the
`BoardWrapper` class that holds the `Board` and
associated objects inherit from `DocumentBoard`, implement the
required virtual methods and write the code that calls the checks and
takes care of argument type conversion.

This makes Horizon EDA one of the few PCB layout tools that can run a
headless design rule check.

### Pool update

With software projects these days, it's usual to have some sort of
continuous integration that tests pull requests as they're opened to
make sure that the code still builds (and passes tests) with the PR
merged. So why not have CI for the pool repository?

The first step in this is to make sure that the pool still updates
without errors, i.e. all dependencies are met. To do so the python
module gained support for opening and updating pools.

### Docker image

To make the pool CI convenient to implement on a variety of CI
platforms, the horizon python module is now available [on
dockerhub](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/horizoneda/horizon/)!
The
[Dockerfile](https://github.com/horizon-eda/horizon/blob/master/Dockerfile) to build the image is quite simple
thanks to Horizon EDA trying to be as maintainer-friendly as possible.

### Continuous integration for the pool repository

With the above things in place, actually
[implementing](https://github.com/horizon-eda/horizon-pool/tree/master/scripts/ci) CI for the pool
repository was rather
[straightforward](https://github.com/horizon-eda/horizon-pool/blob/master/.github/workflows/all.yml)
and adding more checks in the future is even easier!

### Exporting 3D renderings

Since setting up continuous integration can be a bit dull at times, I
decided it's time for some fun features that nobody ever asked for but
might come in handy nevertheless!

Originally, the only way to export a
3D rendering of the PCB was to take a screenshot of the 3D view which has
several shortcomings:

 - Hard to reproduce the exact camera angle
 - No alpha transparency
 - Resolution limited by screen resolution
 - Impossible to automate

All of these shortcomings have been eliminated with the python module now
being able to export 3D renderings. In order to reuse the existing
OpenGL code and shaders, [OSMesa](https://www.mesa3d.org/osmesa.html)
is used to create an offscreen OpenGL context without the need for any
GPU hardware as it makes use of Mesa's software renderer. All of the UI-independent parts of `Canvas3D` were
factored out into `Canvas3DBase` to avoid code duplication.
The rendered image can then either be
directly saved to a PNG file or retrieved as a cairo surface for
further post processing.

Since exporting a single still image is boring, let's have some fun by
exporting many turning them into a silly loop, because we can!

<video muted controls loop style="max-width:100%;">
  <source src="/assets/brd.mp4">
</video>

Here's the code:

```python
import horizon
import numpy as np
import subprocess
import matplotlib

prj = horizon.Project('hubble-pub/hw/main/hubble.hprj')
brd = prj.open_board()
ex = brd.export_3d(720, 540)
ex.load_3d_models()
ex.view_all()
ex.cam_elevation=-30-90
ex.render_background = True
ex.background_top_color = matplotlib.colors.to_rgb("#333365")
ex.background_bottom_color = matplotlib.colors.to_rgb("#B3A26B")
ex.cam_distance *= 1.2

prefix = 'brd'
n = 60*5
for i, angle, h in zip(range(n), np.linspace(0, 360, n, endpoint=False), np.linspace(0, 1, n, endpoint=False)) :
    ex.cam_azimuth = angle
    ex.solder_mask_color = matplotlib.colors.hsv_to_rgb((h,1,.9))
    ex.render_to_png("%s%02d.png"%(prefix, i))
    print(i)

subprocess.call(["ffmpeg", "-y", "-r", "60", "-i", prefix+"%02d.png", "-pix_fmt", "yuv420p", prefix+".mp4"])
```

## Roundoff polygon vertex

Unfortunately, no one jumped in to solve
[#322](https://github.com/horizon-eda/horizon/issues/322) and other
users started asking for this feature, so I decided to implement it.
Compared to other tools, implementing this tool involved a bit of
trigonometry to be worked out beforehand in order to place the arc's
center at the correct position. This tool also makes use of the
non-modal tool window infrastructure to provide a means of directly
entering the radius with a live preview.

## Select on work layer only

When the selection filter got revamped to also support filtering
layers, the "Select only on work layer" checkbox got removed as I
deemed it's now redundant. However, users told me that it made working
on boards with many layers more difficult than before. To alleviate
this, the selection filter dialog grew a new checkbox "Work layer only"
that makes the selection filter behave the same way as it did before as
in that the selection filter specifies the objects and
the work layer specifies the layer objects can be selected on.

## Release 1.1.0

Last but not least, this progress report marks the release of version
1.1.0 "Blue sky". For a summary of the changes relative to version
1.0.0, see the
[changelog](https://github.com/horizon-eda/horizon/blob/v1.1.0/CHANGELOG.md)
or the last progress report posts.

