---
layout: post
title:  "Making visually stable UIs"
date:   2020-02-20 00:12:38 +0100
categories: misc
author: Lukas
---

I'm pretty sure you've seen user interfaces that look something like 
this: 

<video muted autoplay loop>
  <source src="/assets/bad.mp4">
</video>

Let's ignore for the moment that progress bar would be a better fit for this 
particular application.

Are you equally annoyed as me about the text after the 
percentage indicator moving on every increment? Great, in this post, 
I'll explain ~~this one weird trick~~ two simple tricks to ensure that the text following the 
percentage stays locked in place. If you find this okay, don't bother 
reading on and keep making annoying UIs.

We can break down the unwanted jitter of the trailing text into two 
distinct phenomena:

 1. Not all figures have equal width
 1. 10 has one more digit than 9
 
Let's deal with them one after the other.

# Making all figures equal in width

Fonts used in user interfaces these days are usual proportional, i.e. 
every letter takes up as much space as the font author intended so an 
`m` is wider than an `i`. In some fonts, this extends to figures, so a 
`5` is wider than a `1`. While this may look better in context if the 
number isn't changing this however is one cause for the text wobbling.

Since this an issue for tables as well where digits should line up 
regardless of their value, fonts may have *proportional* and *tabular* 
figures. As the name tells, tabular figures are all the same width, so 
a `1` takes up the same space as a `5`. To make use of this an other 
typographic details such as kerning, the OpenType font format supports 
so-called features that allow the user to pick a particular style 
suiting their needs. The one of interest for our use case of course is 
the number spacing.

One might think, that such OpenType features are 
only supported by desktop publishing software and other 
graphics-related applications, but the Gtk's text rendering stack 
supports OpenType font features out-of the box. So all we have to do to 
fix the wobbly text is to set the `tnum 1` font feature. The code to to 
this is a bit unwieldy unfortunately as that part of the API isn't 
supported by Gtkmm so we need to fall back to C:

```c++
void label_set_tnum(Gtk::Label *la)
{
    auto attributes_list = pango_attr_list_new();
    auto attribute_font_features = pango_attr_font_features_new("tnum 1");
    pango_attr_list_insert(attributes_list, attribute_font_features);
    gtk_label_set_attributes(la->gobj(), attributes_list);
    pango_attr_list_unref(attributes_list);
}
```

Similar code is used to set the attribute on numerical entries and 
treeviews. Other modern UI frameworks such as WPF support this as well, 
so no excuse for wobbly text there. If you're stuck with QT (which to 
my astonishment doesn't support OpenType features) or plain old win32, the 
best advice I have is to pick a font that uses tabular figures by 
default.

With this fixed, this is what our example from the beginning looks 
like:

<video muted autoplay loop>
  <source src="/assets/better.mp4">
</video>

# Making the number's width constant

The only thing to make the trailing text in our example rock-solid is 
to make sure that `1` and `10` take up amount equal amounts of space. A 
knee-jerk reaction might be to use your standard libraries facilities 
for padding numbers with spaces to a constant string length, so 
let's see what this gets us:

<video muted autoplay loop>
  <source src="/assets/better2.mp4">
</video>

Well, not all that better. Not too surprising given that a regular space is 
less wide than a digit. Fortunately Unicode got us covered and provides 
`U+2007 FIGURE SPACE` which is supposed to be same width as tabular 
digit. After applying this to our example we've finally achieved visual 
perfection:

<video muted autoplay loop>
  <source src="/assets/good.mp4">
</video>

Everything is locked in place as it should have always been!

# Bonus: negative numbers

Suppose we're writing some sort of CAD application and would like to 
add a coordinate readout. Taking what we know from above into 
consideration, this is what we might get:

<video muted autoplay loop>
  <source src="/assets/c-bad.mp4">
</video>

Oh no! The text moves slightly when the readout transitions from 
negative to positive since a regular ASCII `-` takes up less space than a 
`+`. Once more, Unicode to the rescue: `U+2212 MINUS SIGN` is the same 
with as `+`. With that fixed, this is what we're at:

<video muted autoplay loop>
  <source src="/assets/c-good.mp4">
</video>

Nice, finally no wobbly text for negative numbers.

# Closing remarks

As we've discovered, the usual number formatting options available in 
today's programming languages are inadequate for properly typesetting 
changing numbers in a visually acceptable way. This is quite 
unfortunate as doing the typographically correct thing requires the 
programmer to recognize that something's wrong in the first place and 
then add a non-insignificant amount of code to rectify this issue.

A downside of having gone down the number typesetting rabbithole is 
that I spot blunders in number formatting almost *everywhere I look*:

 * Digital dashboards in cars
 * Clock display on the LED passenger information system used in the 
 Class 430 EMUs
 * Spotify's desktop app
 * Big-Dollar EDA software
 * The entirety of the Gtk by default, despite of 
 [it appering to be fixed](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gtk/issues/41)
 * [Test](https://youtu.be/2OGzs0iea1I?t=295) [equpiment](https://youtu.be/ToVJTKCyIU8?t=2521)

To me at least, improper number typesetting is a sign of shoddy 
workmanship on the same level as wobbly knobs or poor surface finish.
