---
layout: post
title:  "In defense of Glade"
date:   2021-01-30 0:0:0 +0100
categories: misc
author: Lukas
---

Recently, I stumbled upon [a blog post](https://blogs.gnome.org/christopherdavis/2020/11/19/glade-not-recommended/)
from a developer involved in various GNOME apps in which he strongly recommends to not use Glade for 
designing Gtk-based user interfaces. Since I use Glade extensively for 
Horizon EDA this post felt relevant to me. Let me give you some 
background on my experience with Gtk and Glade before presenting my 
stance on this subject.

# History

A long time ago, back in the heyday of GNOME 2, I was starting to get the hang of python and wanted to implement 
graphical user interfaces. Not being satisfied with python's builtin 
Tk, primarily due to its ugly looks, I started to explore other libraries. 
Most notably wxWidgets, Gtk and Qt.

Out of these three, I picked Gtk since its API made sense to me and 
Glade made developing UIs much more approachable. I also played with UI 
designers for Qt and wxWidgets, but Glade was the least intimidating 
one. Since then, Gtk and Glade were inseparable for me.

# Present

When I started Horizon EDA, Gtk and Glade were the obvious choice 
for me as I was familiar with them. Many of the more complex parts of 
the UI such as the part editor are implemented partly 
using Glade. The good thing about Gtk's GtkBuilder (the XML format 
Glade outputs) is that it isn't all-or-nothing. It's easily possible to mix-and-match widgets 
created in code with widgets defined in a GtkBuilder XML file. This 
greatly helps to work around some of Glade's shortcomings, such as 
making it difficult to use custom widgets.

While the arguments brought forward in the linked post are true and I 
don't contend that Glade isn't without its downsides, I wholeheartedly disagree 
with the author's conclusion that these points make Glade more harmful 
than useful. From all of the points mentioned in the blog post, I've 
only encountered the second-last point, namely Glade sometimes 
rearranging objects in the XML file, making diffs less useful. The 
double borders caused by `GtkViewport`s are easily suppressed by 
turning off the viewport's border. I also never touch the XML files 
generated by Glade with a text editor, so if a feature isn't supported 
by Glade, I'll work around it in code rather than manually patching the 
XML file.

The author also completely dismisses the value Glade provides by 
directly manipulating the widgets rather than editing an XML file and 
only getting visual feedback after another compilation cycle. From my 
perspective this more than offsets the shortcomings listed in the 
post.

However, if you're developing a core GNOME app and want or need to use the latest Gtk 
best practices, I can see why Glade might not be for you. If you 
happen to develop a random Gtk-based application like I do, there's
nothing wrong with using Glade.
